Creativity is a website, formerly a monthly magazine, covering all things creative in advertising and design. The magazine, launched in 1986, provides a showcase of the best ideas across all areas of consumer culture, an exploration of the talent and techniques behind the work and insight on the people and the trends shaping brand creativity.
Creativity covers the creative process, from concept through execution. The magazine is popular amongst advertising agency creatives, producers, directors, designers, editors and visual effects artists, advertisers and others affiliated with marketing, advertising, design and entertainment.
Creativity's web site showcases the latest TV commercials, virals, print ads, interactive campaigns, and other forms of brand creativity. Work is updated daily accompanied by full creative and production credits. The site also features news, ad reviews, interviews and content from Creativity Magazine.
Creativity is part of the Ad Age Group, which includes marketing weekly and web site Advertising Age. The Ad Age Group is part of Crain Communications, a privately held publisher of over 30 trade titles.
The print magazine was closed in 2009.


== History of AdCritic.com ==
AdCritic.com was founded in 1999 and was a pioneer in providing free downloadable video, specifically, television commercials. It built a library of thousands of videos and was extremely popular. The cost of providing the necessary bandwidth was too much, however, and the site shut off access to all videos in December 2001. The following notice was posted on the site at that time:
AdCritic.com has enjoyed a successful life as a leader in the area of archiving television and radio advertising and related information for both consumers and the advertising industry. Our business, although strong, has been unable to weather the current economic realities besieging the United States today. The short answer: we became so popular so fast that we couldn't stay afloat!
The site was acquired by The Ad Age Group in March 2002, at which time it changed to a subscription-only service bundled with Creativity magazine. In August 2007, the site was relaunched as Creativity Online.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website