Nancy Sophie Cornélie "Corry" Tendeloo (3 September 1897 – 18 October 1956) was a Dutch lawyer, feminist and politician who was member of the House of Representatives for the Free-thinking Democratic League (Dutch: Vrijzinnig Democratische Bond, VDB) from 1945 until 1946, and then onwards for the Labour Party (Dutch: Partij van de Arbeid, PvdA) until her death in 1956. 
Born in the Dutch East Indies Tendeloo moved with her mother and siblings to the Netherlands after her father died when she was five. She studied law at Utrecht University, during which tme she made contact with people within the women's rights movement. In the 1930s she became politically active, joining the VDB, the Association of Women with Higher Education (Dutch: Nederlandsche Vereeniging van Vrouwen met Academische Opleiding, VVAO) and the Association for Women's Interests and Equal Citizenship (Dutch: Nederlandsche Vereeniging voor Vrouwenbelangen en Gelijk Staatsburgerschap, VVGS). She became president of the VVGS's youth committee and in 1938 became a representative for the VDB on the Amsterdam City Council.
After World War II, Tendeloo became a member of the House of Representatives for the VDB in the national emergency parliament, which was formed to rebuild the country and organise elections. When the VDB merged with other parties into the PvdA, she represented the new party until her death. During her time in parliament she had a seat on two select committees and came up for women's rights issues during debates. She helped secure universal suffrage for the Dutch colonies Suriname and Curacao in 1948. To highlight the difference in opportunities for men and women she applied, under a pseudonym, at the tax academy in Rotterdam, which was only open to men. The following discussion in the media and parliament resulted in 1954 in the government opening up the tax academy to women as well. In early 1955 she successfully made the case for equal pay and later that year put forward a motion to abolish the labour ban on married women. This ban meant that state employers had to fire their female employees once they married. The motion passed with 46 votes in favour and 44 against and is now known as the "motion Tendeloo". The next year she was instrumental in ending couverture, a law which labelled married women as incompetent to act on their own behalf and stopped them from performing acts such as opening a bank account, applying for a mortgage, or sign a labour agreement without the permission of their husband. Tendeloo died in October 1956, before any of the women's rights issues she fought for became law. Largely forgotten after the second wave of feminism in the 1960s and 1970s, in the 21st century efforts have been made to make her achievements more well known.


== Early life and activism ==

Nancy Sophie Cornélie Tendeloo, given name Corry, was born on 3 September 1897 in Tebing Tinggi, on Sumatra, part of the Dutch East Indies. Her mother, Jeanne Cornélie Stamm'ler came from a well-to-do family, as did her father, a high-ranking civil servant named Henri Tendeloo. Her father died when she was five years old, and in 1903 she moved with her mother and two siblings to the Netherlands. She went to primary school in Amersfoort and secondary school in Leiden. In 1916 the family moved to Utrecht. Two years later she earned an English-teaching diploma and started teaching at a local school, which she continued doing until 1921. She also became a certified English translator. In 1919 she began reading law at Utrecht University, from which she graduated in 1924. As a student she made contact with people within the women's rights movement, and she represented the Utrecht Women's Student Association in the Dutch Women's Council.{ During her student days, the women's movement in the Netherlands was waning in prominence. The first wave of feminism in the Netherlands started in the late 19th century and involved feminists such as Aletta Jacobs and Wilhelmina Drucker, who successfully campaigned for the right of women to vote and stand for parliament. This became enshrined in law in 1919, after which a smaller number of feminists continued the fight for equality in other aspects of life.In 1924 Tendeloo joined a law firm and in 1927 she began to practice as an independent lawyer in Amsterdam dealing with issues concerning the legal position of women. She also volunteered as legal advisor to people unable to pay and as such encountered cases involving women’s legal inequalities. In 1928 she volunteered as secretary for the Dutch Women Club (Dutch: Nederlandsche Vrouwenclub), a position she held until 1937. She was president of the housing cooperative The New House (Dutch: Het Nieuwe Huis), an appartment complex for unmarried women in Amsterdam in which she lived.


== Political career ==


=== Early years ===
In the 1930s Tendeloo became politically active. She joined the Free-thinking Democratic League (Dutch: Vrijzinnig Democratische Bond, VDB), a political party founded in 1901 primarily with the aim of achieving universal suffrage. She also joined the Association of Women with Higher Education (Dutch: Nederlandsche Vereeniging van Vrouwen met Academische Opleiding, VVAO) and became a member of its management team in 1933. The VVAO's central position was that through academic achievement women could lead a fulfilling life and did not necessarily have to seek marriage. It criticized the state's interference in married women's decisions to take part in the workforce. Tendeloo also joined another organisation fighting for women's rights called the Association for Women's Interests and Equal Citizenship (Dutch: Nederlandsche Vereeniging voor Vrouwenbelangen en Gelijk Staatsburgerschap, VVGS). She became president of its youth committee. Both organisations were founded in order to combat the fact that women had fewer rights than men and were not expected to be part of public life and the progress of society. Through their existence, they intended to affect change over three stages: from awareness to legal equality to practical equalityAs president of the VVGS youth committee she, together with other feminists such as Willemijn Posthumus-van der Goot, organised protest events across the country when in 1937 parliament discussed Minister Carl Romme's draft law to ban married women from doing paid work. This lead the VDB to put her up as candidate in the elections for Provincial Council of North Holland. She did not win a seat but it earned her a place on the candidate list in the Amsterdam City Council elections. Tendeloo became a representative for the VDB on the Amsterdam City Council in 1938 but remained active in the VVGS, campaigning for men to see women as an equal party in the workforce who contribute to the progress of society, and not just to their families at home. She said that once society's view of women changed, the outdated laws that discriminate against women would be rewritten. In 1941, under German occupation during World War II City Council proceedings were suspended. When Jewish council members were dismissed as part of the Nazi's Final Solution, she sent them expressions of sympathy.


=== House of Representatives ===
After the war, she retook her seat at the Amsterdam City Council and in November 1945 became a member of the House of Representatives for the VDB in the national emergency parliament, which was formed to rebuild the country and organise elections. A committee appointed members to replace those who had stepped down or been killed during the war. Tendeloo was chosen to take Betsy Bakker-Nort's seat, a feminist with whom Tendeloo felt a kinship and who became a member of parliament for the VDB in 1922 following her involvement in the women's suffrage movement.At this stage Tendeloo combined her legal practice with both her City Council job and her job in national politics.  She resigned from the Amsterdam City Council in September 1946. Following the merger of the VDB with the Social Democratic Workers' Party (Dutch: Sociaal-Democratische Arbeiderspartij, SDAP) and the Christian Democratic Union (Dutch: Christelijk-Democratische Unie, CDU) in 1946 she automatically became a member of the newly formed Labour Party (Dutch: Partij van de Arbeid, PvdA). On the ranked list of PvdA candidates for the 1946 elections she ranked third out of five for the former VDB party. The PvdA won 29 of the 100 seats, making them the second biggest party after the Catholic People's Party (Dutch: Katholieke Volkspartij, KVP), with whom they formed a coalition government. Tendeloo was the only woman to win a seat for the PvdA. Soon after the elections she joined the PvdA commission to define the newly formed party's manifesto.In 1946 Tendeloo criticised the Ministry of Social Affairs for commissioning research into the reasons why there was such a shortage of female workers, pointing out that before the war the government had actively dissuaded women from taking part in the workforce, saying a women's place is at home. Tendeloo concluded that the government simply changed its stance on women in the workplace based on the needs of the labour market, discarding women at their earliest convenience. In 1947 Tendeloo unsuccessfully tried to stop a ministerial ruling put forward by Minister of Internal Affairs Louis Beel that asked ministries to restrict the hiring of married women. In 1948 she was successful, together with Wim de Kort, in securing universal suffrage for the Dutch colonies Suriname and Curacao . After she was diagnosed with cancer in 1952 she gave up her legal work in Amsterdam and was absent from parliament for almost a year. In February 1953 she became president of the House of Representatives' Justice Budget Committee, which she remained until September of that year. She then became deputy chair of the Justice Select Committee, a position she kept until October 1956, during which she worked on the definition of a new civil code. To highlight the difference in opportunities for men and women she applied, under a pseudonym, to the tax academy in Rotterdam, which was then only open to men. The following discussion in the media, where the applicant was termed 'Miss X', and in parliament, resulted in the government opening up the tax academy to women in 1954.


==== Equal pay debates ====
In March 1955 Tendeloo debated the issue of equal pay in the House of Representatives. In a column in the newspaper Het Vrije Volk she argued that on this topic the women's rights movement had gone the long way round, starting in 1898 and involving the League of Nations, the United Nations and ultimately the International Labour Organization, which in 1951 adopted the Equal Remuneration Convention. The government accepted the principle of equal pay but argued against ratification and execution on practical grounds: the pay gap of 30% should be closed over time and not, as the government believed the convention required, at once. Tendeloo argued that the convention did not require an immediate closure of the pay gap. The government also argued it was up to the private sector to decide whether equal pay was a priority above other social issues. Tendeloo argued that in her experience anythinginvolving women's rights would end up at the bottom of the priority list. When the government argued that equal pay would ruin the growing economy, Tendeloo pointed out that this was primarily a social justice issue, but that if ever there was a time to deal with the cost of social justice, it was now, in a growing economy. Tendeloo submitted a motion, with six others, to invite the government to ratify and execute the Equal Remuneration Convention as quickly as possible. The motion passed with 47 votes in favour and 39 against, with crucial votes in favour coming from Christine Wttewaall van Stoetwegen's party the Christian Historical Union (Dutch: Christelijk-Historische Unie CHU). However, the government did not act upon it.


==== Motion Tendeloo ====
In September 1955, Tendeloo moved a motion, which later became known as the Motion Tendeloo, to wish to end the forced dismissal of female civil servants once they married. Since 1924 there was a specific regulation that banned married women from working for the state, partly instituted on the principal grounds that her place was with the family, and partly on economic grounds that the state needed to make cuts during the depression. In the 1930s the Hendrik Colijn government wrote proposals to ban married women from working in the private sector as well, but these were not implemented. During and after World War II, with great labour shortages, the law was circumvented by offering dismissed married women a temporary contract. In 1950, fewer than 2% of married women worked.At many opportunities throughout her tenure in parliament did Tendeloo raise the issue of inequality in the workplace; in September 1955 she forced an interpellation during a discussion about a proposed law for teachers. Tendeloo argued that the government's position on maintaining forced dismissal of married teachers, albeit with more exemptions than before, was out of touch with society. Her main argument was that it fundamentally was a decision for the married couple whether or not the wife should work, adding that it was "such a restriction on personal freedom that I find it undemocratic". She accused the government of opportunism and lacking a principled approach. She ended her speech urging the government to revise its position with the advise "better to turn halfway than get lost the whole way". The government argued that it seemed physically and psychologically irresponsible for a woman to combine looking after her family with work. Disappointed by this reply Tendeloo moved her motion, together with Jeanne Fortanier-de Wit.Following days of debate, during which members of faith-based parties argued that removing the ban would jeopardise the well-being of families, the Motion Tendeloo was put up for a vote on 22 September 1955. It was short, two lines, and simply stated that the House was of the opinion that the State should not ban married women to work, bar cases of abuse, and invited the government to revise all laws that contradicted it. Minister Beel invited the House not to accept the motion, but admitted it was not unacceptable. The motion passed with 46 votes in favour and 44 against. The vote went largely along party lines: all members of the PvdA, CPN, and VVD voted in favour. All ten female representatives voted in favour and of the faith-based parties, four men voted in favour. Het Vrije Volk reported the next day that if the ten absent members had voted, the motion would still have passed, by a 52—48 vote.


==== Couverture ====

Tendeloo was instrumental in ending couverture in the Netherlands: married women were forbidden by law from opening a bank account, applying for a mortgage or insurance, signing a labour agreement and many other actions without the permission of their husband. Their legal status was termed "incompetent to act", equal to those of minors and people with severe mental health problems. Similar laws existed in other countries, for example, the United States. This inequality between women and men existed in the first Dutch civil code written in 1838, which named the man as the head of the matrimonial union. A married woman had to leave management of her personal possessions to her husband; she had to obey him and live with him. She could not take any legal action without him. While an unmarried woman had many rights, she would lose her full legal capacity the day she married. Bakker-Nort headed a committee in the 1920s to revamp marriage law but did not succeed in making any changes. In the midst of working on new legislation in January 1956 Minister of Justice Leendert Donker unexpectedly died; Tendeloo urged prime minister Willem Drees to appoint Julius Christiaan van Oven as successor, knowing van Oven's views on equal legal rights for women and men and couverture in particular. Van Oven put a basic principle of competency to act to a vote in February 1956, which passed with a 56 to 11 vote. However, the Justice Select Committee insisted on making an amendment to the draft legislation by adding a non-legal sentence saying "the man is the head of the marriage", aimed to please the Christian members of parliament. Tendeloo argued against the amendment, saying it was this very notion that was the root of the issues the new legislation was addressing. Nevertheless, the amendment passed with 41 votes in favour and 35 against. In May 1956 the House passed the entire new legislation that ended couverture, now called Lex van Oven, without taking a vote.
The husband no longer is automatically right about everything and the wife's subordination is a thing of the past!
This debate in May 1956, during which Tendeloo said that it appeared the male members of the House were afraid, was her last in parliament. The next day she was admitted to hospital for a breast operation, which she had postponed to be able to be in parliament.


== Death and legacy ==
Tendeloo did not live to see any of her motions become the law. Only on 1 January 1957 did couverture end officially. Not until during the next Drees cabinet, in November 1957, was the ban on work for married women abolished. Not until 1975 did equal pay become law. Tendeloo died on 18 October 1956 in Wassenaar. She was buried in Bilthoven on 22 October. At the funeral, which was attended by nearly all members of the House of Representatives, Liesbeth Ribbius Peletier, former chair of the VVGS and fellow PvdA member, praised Tendeloo's efforts and called her an "energetic and relentless women's rights fighter". Jaap Burger, the PvdA House leader, said she had been an allround politician who had earned much respect in parliament. Beethoven's Ode to Joy was played. Afterwards, Speaker of the House of Representatives Rad Kortenhorst said in parliament that she had been "an apostle" with "sharp, legal insights"; prime minister Drees praised her great dedication to women's rights issues. PvdA colleague Rita de Bruin called her a "tireless fighter for women's rights". Algemeen Dagblad called her "one of the most capable and successful feminists" and "honest and broad of opinion, always opposed to untruth". Het Parool commented that it must have given her great satisfaction to see just before she died the appointment of Marga Klompé as the first female minister of the Netherlands, something she had urged prime minister Drees to so already in 1952.Following the second wave of feminism in the 1960s and 1970s, Tendeloo was largely forgotten. More recently, Tendeloo is seen as one of the few who kept feminism alive in the Netherlands in between the first and second waves of feminism. Lilianne Ploumen, member of the House of Representatives for the PvdA, said in 2019 that Tendeloo has done more for women than any prime minister in Tendeloo's time, adding that is time to put Tendeloo in the history textbooks. Professor Carla van Baalen, director of the Centre for Dutch Parliamentary History, called Tendeloo a "passionate feminist" and said she "deserves very much to be saved from oblivion". Merel Ek, conservator at the Museum of Democracy, questioned how it could be that even though Tendeloo "almost until her deathbed fought for women's economic independence", she is not known. Tendeloo frequently used a French saying to describe her own fighting approach: "Frappez, frappez toujours!", which translates into "Repeat, repeat making your point!" Ek said this tireless spirit was exemplified by Tendeloo postponing her operation to be able to debate in parliament. According to Posthumus-van der Goot, Tendeloo deployed the techniques the male members of the House used: first stating one has listened with great interest to the speaker, next one agrees with what was said, then stating one has just an addition, followed by sharp critique. Tendeloo said she could only be taken seriously in parliament if she did it this way.A bridge in Amsterdam was named after her in 2016 and streats bearing her name can be found in the cities of Arnhem and Deventer. An online petition to get a statue erected in the Hague to honour Tendeloo was signed over 18,000 times but paused when the Covid-19 pandemic started.


== Honours ==
In 1954 Tendeloo was granted a Knighthood in the Order of the Netherlands Lion.


== Publications ==
N. S. C. Tendeloo, A. J. Hoek-Van Nieuwkerk & A. H. Weyers (1936): De oude-dags-voorziening voor werkende vrouwen. In: Rapport aan het bestuur van de Nederlandsche Bond van Vrouwen werkzaam in Bedrijf en Beroep afd. Amsterdam.
N. S. C. Tendeloo & J. Boer (1940): De techniek van het vereenigingsleven. Rotterdam: Nigh & van Ditmar.
N. S. C. Tendeloo (1946): De Vrijzinnig-Democratische vrouwen. In: C. Pothuis-Smit (Ed.) Wat deden vrouwen met haar kiesrecht? pp. 161-71.
N. S. C. Tendeloo (1946—1956): Parlementaria column in Vrouwenbelangen (monthly magazine VVGS)
N. S. C. Tendeloo (1949): Generale preventie. In: Socialisme en Democratie, pp. 749-51.


== Footnotes ==


== References ==


=== Sources ===
Albarda, J. W.; Banning, W. (2002). "Het PvdA-programma van 1947". Het sociaal-democratisch programma. De beginselprogramma's van SDB, SDAP en PVDA 1878-1977 [The 1947 PvdA program] (in Dutch). Amsterdam: Bert Bakker. pp. 237–290. ISBN 90-351-2526-6.
van Baalen, C. C. (1998). "De politiek en de rechtsgelijkheid van vrouwen op het gebied van arbeid (1955)" [The politics and rights equality of women in the realm of labour]. Politiek(E) Opstellen (in Dutch). 18: 99–115. ISSN 0923-2850.
van Baalen, Carla (2005). "A. Linders, 'Frappez, frappez toujours!' NS Corry Tendeloo (1897-1956) en het feminisme in haar tijd" [A. Linders, 'Frappez, frappez toujours!' NS Corry Tendeloo (1897-1956) and feminism of her time]. BMGN: Low Countries Historical Review (in Dutch). 120 (1): 148–150. doi:10.18352/bmgn-lchr.6191.
Bosch, Mineke (2005). "Anneke Linders,'Frappez, frappez toujours'. NS Corry Tendeloo (1897-1956) en het feminisme van haar tijd" [A. Linders, 'Frappez, frappez toujours!' NS Corry Tendeloo (1897-1956) and feminism of her time]. Tijdschrift voor Genderstudies (in Dutch). 8 (4): 81–83.
Cornelis, Mirjam; Hinderink, Margot (1989). Vrouwen in Nederland en de Verenigde Staten - de geschiedenis vanaf 1929 [Women in the Netherlands and the United States - the history since 1929] (in Dutch). Haarlem: Fibula. ISBN 9789026944604.
Frijhoff, Willem; Schuyt, Kees; Spies, Marijke (2004). Dutch Culture in a European Perspective: 1950, prosperity and welfare. Assen: Royal Van Gorcum. ISBN 9789023239666.
Jansen, C. J. H. (2006). "De Lex-van Oven: 50 jaar opheffing handelingsonbekwaamheid van de gehuwde vrouw" [The Lex van Oven: 50 years after abolishing married women's incompetency to act]. NJB (in Dutch). 81 (23): 1256–1260.
Jansz, Ulla (1983). Vrouwen, ontwaakt! Driekwart eeuw sociaal-democratische vrouwenorganisatie tussen solidariteit en verzet [Wake up, women! A social-democratic women's organisation between solidarity and resistance for three quarters of a century] (in Dutch). Amsterdam: Bert Bakker. ISBN 9789060199626.
van Kamp, J. E. (2004). "Anneke Linders, Frappez, frappez toujours! NS Corry Tendeloo (1897-1956) en het feminisme in haar tijd" [A. Linders, 'Frappez, frappez toujours!' NS Corry Tendeloo (1897-1956) and feminism of her time]. TSEG: The Low Countries Journal of Social and Economic History (in Dutch). 1 (3): 133–134. doi:10.18352/tseg.846.
Koole, Ruud; Lucardie, Paul; Voerman, Gerrit (1988). 40 jaar vrij en verenigd - Geschiedenis van de VVD-partijorganisatie 1948- 1988. Houten: Unieboek. ISBN 90-269-4620-1.
Linders, Anneke (1997). "Vier fronten, een strijd" [Four frontiers, one struggle].  In Luykx, Paul; Slot, Pim (eds.). Een stille revolutie? cultuur en mentaliteit in de lange jaren vijftig [A quiet revolution? Culture and mentality in the long decade of the 1950s] (in Dutch). pp. 109–129. ISBN 9789065505491.
Linders, Anneke (2003). 'Frappez, frappez toujours!' N.S. Corry Tendeloo (1897-1956) en het feminisme in haar tijd [‘Frappez, frappez toujours!’ N.S. Corry Tendeloo (1897-1956) and feminism in her time] (in Dutch). Hilversum: Verloren. ISBN 90-6550-765-5.
van de Loo, Vilan (2005). De vrouw beslist - de tweede feministische golf in Nederland [The woman decides - the second wave of feminism in the Netherlands] (in Dutch). Wormer: Inmerc. ISBN 9789066115446.
Sikkema, T. H. (2011). "De gehuwde vrouw in het burgerlijk recht".  In de Breedveld, V. C.G. (ed.). Signora Senatrice - Over Recht, Onderwijs en Politiek [The married woman in the civil code] (in Dutch). The Hague: Boom Juridische Uitgevers. pp. 117–125. hdl:1887/58001. ISBN 9789089745828.
Taylor Allen, Ann (2005). Feminism and Motherhood in Western Europe, 1890-1970 - The Maternal Dilemma. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 1-4039-6236-7.
Plantenga, J. (1999). "Een afwijkend patroon. Honderd jaar vrouwenarbeid".  In van der Bie, R.; Dehing, P. (eds.). Nationaal goed. Feiten en cijfers over onze samenleving (ca.) 1800 - 1999 [A diverging pattern. Hundred years of women's labour] (in Dutch). Voorburg: Centraal Bureau voor de Statistiek. pp. 91–105. ISBN 978-9068611700.